Reading, happiness, love, romance, passion,
sex, intelligence, overworking, … something
is common among all these words. And, if you
throw them into Google and search for what
is common, you will notice that there are
articles, there are posters, out there on
the web, where they claim that each of these,
each of these!, is overrated! Among those,
specifically one word, a word that is frequently
talked about as overrated, and that is the
word we are going to talk about today!
Namaste!
Long back, around ten, twelve years ago, Elon
Musk, when asked about, “Hey, what is it
to be an entrepreneur..? You have not built
one company.. Not two companies.. You have
been a serial entrepreneur.. And you’ve
been quite successful at it.. What is your
secret?!”, he says, “One needs a tolerance
for pain. You need to be able to withstand
tremendous amounts of pain. You need to, in
fact, WANT it! You need to be the kind of
guy who wants more and more pain!”.. And
he goes on to quote this memorably:- “Being
an entrepreneur is like staring into the abyss…
a bottomless pit. A hellish deep. You are
staring into the abyss, no idea what’s inside,
no idea what’s waiting for you, and… while
doing that, you are also eating glass!”
Staring into the abyss, eating glass! That
is how Elon Musk conveys what the entrepreneur’s
life is like.
Even before this… when Bill Gates and Steve
Jobs got together… It is pretty rare.. You
don’t see these two opponents.. Two of the
greatest companies in Silicon Valley. Apple
and Microsoft. They don’t sit together too
often! When they got together… at a conference
called the D Conference.. Just a few years
before Steve Jobs died… during that interview,
Steve says something very important about
the importance of passion, … What is passion,
and why is it important! Listen!
“People say you have to have a lot of passion
for what you’re doing and it’s totally
true. And the reason is because it’s so
hard that if you don’t, any rational person
would give up. It’s really hard. And you
have to do it over a sustained period of time.
So if you don’t love it, if you’re not
having fun doing it, you don’t really love
it, you’re going to give up. And that’s
what happens to most people, actually. If
you really look at the ones that ended up,
you know, being “successful” in the eyes
of society and the ones that didn’t, oftentimes,
it’s the ones [who] were successful loved
what they did so they could persevere, you
know, when it got really tough. And the ones
that didn’t love it quit because they’re
sane, right? Who would want to put up with
this stuff if you don’t love it? So it’s
a lot of hard work and it’s a lot of worrying
constantly and if you don’t love it, you’re
going to fail. So you’ve got to love it
and you’ve got to have passion…”
One word. Passion. He so easily slips it off
his tongue, and gets away! Great man that
he is! What is that passion, and is it really
overrated? And, is it a general word that
we can throw at something and be passionate
about it and we will succeed? Or, is there
some formula for it? Passionate about what?
How passionate? Passion at what times? If
you wonder there is a formula for this…
well… this might be a good guidebook for
you. It is called The Entrepreneur Roller
Coaster. Darren Hardy is the author. In this
book, he talks about four switches, not one,
not two, but four switches, each of these
four you can turn on. Each of these four you
can be passionate about. And, each of them
will leave with different intensity, with
different stamina and sustainability, towards
your goal. What are those four switches??
The first switch.. it is like lightning. You
have no idea when it is coming. You have no
idea when it will strike again. Powerful.
Very powerful. It can break a house down,
it can burn a tree up, but.. you can’t read
a book in the light you get from lightning,
however bright it is! So, the question there
is — Being passionate about WHAT you do!
Am I passionate about what I am doing? Good
question. Many people decide their careers
based on their answer to that question. But..
there is a very fundamental problem hiding
there. We have seen this problem earlier too.
The problem is — 95/5 division between what
you really like doing, and all the other things
you have to do, to get there. Don’t you
agree? Work is going to suck. 95 percent of
the time. Whatever work you do.. Even if you
are A R Rahman himself, or the great A B De
Villiers… There is a lot of other work you
have to do, to somehow get to that 5% awesomeness.
Yes, it is awesome. Ecstatic. But, like lightning.
One can’t trust that, and say, they are
passionate about this, and be misled. We have
talked about it in an earlier Quotidian, 079,
and we have talked about the 80/20 rule. Pareto’s
Principle. In fact, if you look at the new
input today, you would realise it is not 80/20
but closer to 95/5!
What is the second switch? The second switch
is like The Sun. It is there! High up in the
sky, guiding you, giving you warmth, giving
you light, all the time.. Okay, not all the
time. At night, it is a bit harder. But, it
is there. All you have to do is look up. And,
the second question that you will have to
ask yourself is, “Am I passionate about
WHY I am doing this..?” We have talked about
this, at length, earlier too. Starting with
Why, was the overarching theme. Simon Sinek’s
Golden Circle. Starting with Why is the most
important thing you have to do. Not what you
are producing. Not the manufacturing process.
But, why you are doing it. That is very important.
If you want to dig deeper, yes, there is an
earlier Quotidian for you. Quotidian 201.
Starting with Why. Yes, that is the second
switch, and it is much better than being passionate
about WHAT you are doing. Because… what
you are doing is about the thing that you
are getting ready, and why you are doing it
is the impact it is going to have. So, Why
is more important than the What.
The third switch? The third switch is like
a table lamp. Anytime you want, you can switch
it on, you can bring something close to it,
you can get light to shine on it, and you
can make better sense. The question in the
Third Switch is, are you passionate about
HOW you are doing it… The thing about being
passionate about WHY you are doing it is…
only when the end result is meaningful enough,
good enough, you can say, okay, this is the
end result, this is the impact this is having,
and so, that is my WHY, and I am passionate
about it… But, what about all the beginners?
All the newcomers? All those starry-eyed entrepreneurs
who WANT to get started but who are shabby,
who are not skilled, who are clueless, what
way out do they have? The solution for them
is “Start by being passionate about HOW
you are doing it!” The process. The method.
The 95/5 rule breaks down here. Because, even
if I am spending only five percent of my time
doing that WHAT, even in that rest of the
ninety-five percent of the time, I will be
doing things that prepare me for that five
percent. And, that is the HOW! So, I get to
enjoy that ecstasy much more than just doing
it in that five percent. So, that is the third
question. Be passionate about HOW you are
doing it. The routines. The little things.
The consistency. The sustained effort you
put in everyday, becoming incrementally better.
That is what we have called as Flow, earlier.
When you are in flow, you don’t even notice
the passage of time, you don’t know you
are getting hungry, you are getting tired,
you are in a Zone of your own. You are challenged,
and you know your capabilities can meet that
challenge. That is the switch number three.
Being passionate about HOW you are doing it.
Great! What comes beyond all this.. What is
the fourth switch? What is the most important
switch perhaps? That is the switch you can
wear on your head. Like a torchlight, if you
attach it to your helmet, wherever you turn,
whenever you want, whatever you want light
to be shined on to, will be lit. Anytime.
Isn’t that the most comfortable? The question
here is: Are you passionate about WHO you
are doing it for..? Who are you doing it for?
For the people? For the country? For self-pride?
For Mother Earth? For the family? For your
company? To destroy your competitor? Who are
you doing it for?
Just yesterday, news hit us about Satya Nadella,
the Microsoft CEO, his son, Zain Nadella,
passing away at the young age of 26. Just
twenty-six years old. Cerebral Palsy. Severe
case of cerebral palsy. He passed away at
just 26. And, I was reminded of the book,
Hit Refresh, that he wrote. A book that Satya
Nadella had penned while he was still the
CEO of Microsoft. In that book, in a particular
chapter, he talks about the impact his son,
and the problem his son has, has had on his
career. I have highlighted a little box there,
but you can read the whole thing. He says,
I am at the hospital. I hear beep beeps everywhere.
I see monitors everywhere. There is hardware.
There is software. Data is being synced to
the cloud. That is when it hit me — our
work at Microsoft transcended business. It
is not just about business, revenue, profit.
Far beyond that. A life. Protecting it, maintaining
it, comforting it. That was the work we were
doing. That was the feeling I got. A fragile
young boy. We were being a lifeline for him.
And then he says, “Being an empathetic father,
and bringing that desire to discover what
is at the core, the soul, makes me a better
leader”. I recommend that you read the whole
book, but this is the essence of how he conveys
the impact his son has had. Every day, after
finishing work and heading home, when I see
him, … so goes the narrative. So, the question
you ask yourself here is, “Am I passionate
about who I am doing it for”. That is the
final question. That is probably the most
important question.
Well then, we saw four switches. What am I
doing? Am I passionate about it? Why am I
doing it? Am I passionate about that? How
am I doing it? Does that stoke passion in
me? Who am I doing it for? That is the most
important type of passion.
When we talk about the word “passion”,
the inner meaning, the original meaning of
the word is important too. If you search in
Google for the “etymology of passion”,
the story, the origin story for the word,
you will notice something very interesting.
Yes, there is Latin, there is French, all
mixed in. Pati. Latin. To endure, to undergo,
to experience. Passionem. Suffering. Enduring.
Passion. Christ’s passion. Physical suffering.
Unbearable pain being borne, because you like
it. There was even a movie titled “The Passion
of Jesus Christ”. I was wondering, what
this was all about. How could Jesus be connected
with, wink wink, Passion?! A movie by Mel
Gibson. But, that’s when it occurred to
me. The original meaning of that word is all
about suffering and enduring, because you
are driven by a higher purpose. So, understand
the right meaning of the word, turn on the
correct switch, meet you at the other side.
By the way, we are done with 2, I will meet
you on the 9th. Thank you!